userguide_raw/docs/index.md, before:

# Userguide for the Debian-trixie PineNote OS image

## Introduction

Hi there, nice of you to install this Debian image on your PineNote!

Before you begin, please bear in mind that the PineNote, and this image, is
aimed a experienced users and developers, and many things need manual tweaking
or do not just work yet.
However, many things also work, and you can take control of quite a lot of
things.
If you have not done this yet, we strongly recommend to at least skim this
document before proceeding to use your PineNote.

If you want to improve this text, merge requests are very very much appreciated!

[Improve on github](https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-tweaks/tree/main/pn_handbook)

## Where to get help

Remember, software for the PineNote is created by the community, for the
community!

Probably the best and fastest way to get help is to join the PineNote chat via
Matrix, irc, or Discord. Please refer to the wiki page for more information on
chats and forums: [Pine64
Wiki](https://wiki.pine64.org/wiki/Main_Page#Community_and_Support).

## Getting started

* User/Password: You are logged in as user "user" with password "1234". sudo is
  activated. We suggest to set a root password:

    ```
    sudo su - root
    passwd
    ```

* The **Documents/** directory contains one sample .pdf and one .epub file. Try
  opening them and start reading!

* You may want (should!) to reconfigure your locales:

	```
	sudo dpkg-reconfigure locales
 	```

  GNOME localisation can be changed in the settings.

* The status bar at the top contains the refresh button and the PineNote-Helper
  Gnome extension, which helps you to control some aspects of the eink display.
  Both of these items will become important for an effective use of the
  PineNote in a Gnome environment.

* (advanced users) Your PineNote comes partitioned with two operating system
  partitions (**os1** and **os2**, each ca. 15 GB in size).
  The default install resides on **os1**, leaving **os2** for experiments, such
  as other distributions images, etc. If you plan on modifying this
  installation heavily, a second install to **os2** could help in recovering
  from serious errors. More information on installing a Debian image to **os2**
  can be found
  [here](https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-debian-image/blob/trixie/partition_tables/Readme.md).

## How do I...

* **Read a book (epub)/pdf**:
	* Koreader is already installed and should be registered for corresponding
	  file types
* **Take notes**: Xournalpp is installed on the Pinenote by default.
  See this meta-issue on github for more information and other programs to
  test: https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-debian-image/issues/81
* Surf the internet using Firefox
* **Use the Pinenote as an external screen?**:
	* (untested) The Weylus project could be of help: https://github.com/H-M-H/Weylus
* **Use an external monitor with the Pinenote?**: The Pinenote is not wired to
  provide external display support via usb-c (this is called [alternate
  mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB-C#Alternate_modes). Therefore, if you
  want to use the PineNote as an external display, you will need to use other
  means.
	* (untested) The Weylus project could be of help: https://github.com/H-M-H/Weylus
	* (untested) Provided that you are running a newer GNOME installation on
	  your computer, you could try to use gnome remote connections and virtual
	  monitors
	  (https://ubuntuhandbook.org/index.php/2023/07/share-extended-screen-gnome/)

## The Gnome extension for the PineNote

The PN comes with an extension installed that provides quick access to certain
pinenote-related functionality.
Four items are added to the GNOME interface:

* a "global refresh" button right next the system clock (circular arrow)
* a P/Q performance/quality mode switcher and indicator (to the right of the
  refresh button)
* A menu button/indicator, to the right of the mode switcher.
* An additional backlight slider is also added to the quicksettings menu,
  opened by clicking/touching the battery symbol in the upper right of the
  panel

![gnome_extension](img/gnome_extension.png)

## Updates

Apart from a number of tweaks aimed at producing an improved user experience on
the PineNote, and a few patched packages, you are running a Debian trixie
operating system which can be maintained as very other system. Use `apt` or
`aptitude` to manage you packages. `gnome-software` is also installed and
should prompt you within GNOME in regular intervals if software updates are
available.

A PineNote package repository is in its early testing phase, and should be
configured by default in this installation. For manual configuration of the
repository, please refer to [this part of the image
Readme.](https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-debian-image/tree/dev#pinenote-specific-debian-repository)

## Drawing Performance is too slow

Multiple things come into play here, and debugging those issues usually is
complicated:

* Please note the epd (eink) panel is highly temperature sensitive. Colder
  temperatures require longer waveforms to excitate the ink particles in the
  panel, which there leads to slower refresh rates.
* Xournalpp: There is an older, slightly patched, Xournalpp available. For
  *some* people, drawing performance increased with that version, for others
  not. Note that sometimes the background is not properly refreshed in this
  version, requiring a small scrolling action to actually show the background.
* Make sure to cycle to Quality mode and then back to Performance mode in
  GNOME. This is done using the P/Q Symbols in the upper status bar. Just press
  the respective character once to change between modes. You want the
  P(erformance) mode for drawing.
* It was reported that the 6.3 kernel version installed on the PineNote
  provides faster drawing performance (the downside is that potentially in some
  scenarios you will observe visual artifacts due to some subtle internal
  queuing bugs)

See also [this github
issue](https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-debian-image/issues/81) for more
information.

## Using another partition for /home

Depending on the method of installation, /home is located on the root
partition, which is quite small in size (check by analysing the output of the
*mount* command).
However, a bash script is
provided in `/root/switch_home_to_other_partition.sh` which can be used to
change the partition that is used for /home. The script can also transfer data
from the current /home to the new partition. Call as root.

Example to switch /home to /dev/mmcblk0p7:

	cd /root
	switch_home_to_other_partition.sh /dev/mmcblk0p7

## Switching the default boot partitions

You need shell root access, either via ssh, or via the UART dongle

* mount the uboot_env partition:

			mount /uboot_env

* use the provided shell script to change the boot order:

			cd /root
			./uboot_change_bootmenu.sh

## Documentation for apps/systems

### Wakeup-Sources

The PineNote can be woken up from suspend from these sources:

* Cover opening
* Bluetooth
* Power cable plug-in/plug-out
* PWR Button
* Touch screen (not configured by default)
* (batch 1 from 2022): BLE Buttons on the pen

### Sleep sources

* PWR-Button-press
* Pen-Button-Press

### BLE Pen (Buttons)

!!! info

	This is only relevant for the first batch of PineNotes, sold in 2022. The
	2024 batch does not have BLE buttons in the pen!

The PineNote Pen interfaces with the PineNote using two interfaces:

* The stylus input is one using the touchscreen (cyttsp5 driver),
* on the other hand, the three buttons are controlled via a separate
  Bluetooth-Low-Energy-based connection.

  A driver for the BLE-button interface was developed by smaeul
	(https://github.com/smaeul/linux/commits/rk356x-ebc-dev).

The hardware contains non-volatile storage for the MAC address - it could be
that the pen just works. Otherwise, as root, connect manually:

	echo 1 > /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/scan; # scanning takes ca. 12 seconds
											 # press the buttons during scanning
    # print MAC address pen
	cat /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/scan
	echo [MAC] > /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/pen_address

Afterwards, check that the pen is working by checking the pen attributes:

	cat /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/pen_version
	cat /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/pen_battery

### EBC Kernel Driver

The EBC subsystem controls the eink (or epd) display and is one of components
which require most tweaking for each user.

	* ioctls

		* trigger global refresh
		* set offline-screen
		* [to implement] set standby screen mask & behavior
	* misc:

		* discuss the waveform-switching issues in a general DE environment:
		  recommend to always do a global refresh after switching waveforms,
		  unless you know that your buffer is compatible
### Usage

All module parameters are controlled using the sysfs parameters in
/sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters

The module parameters can also be set on module load time, for example using
the modprobe configuration file:

	root@pinenote:~# cat /etc/modprobe.d/rockchip_ebc.conf
	options rockchip_ebc direct_mode=0 auto_refresh=1 split_area_limit=0 panel_reflection=1

By default the parameters in /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters need to be
writen to as root, but this can be easily changed via udev rules.

### Debugging

Newer versions of the kernel driver use the (dynamic debug
feature)[https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/dynamic-debug-howto.html]
of the linux kernel.

As root, the following commands should get you going. Note that the line
numbers can change between kernel releases! Check the output of `cat control |
grep rockchip_ebc`

	cd /sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/
	# lists all debug outputs available for the module
	cat control  | grep rockchip_ebc
	# now we can activate/disable individual debug statements
	echo -n 'file drivers/gpu/drm/rockchip/rockchip_ebc.c line 1289 +p' > control
	# list currently active (=p) debug statements
	cat control  | grep rockchip_ebc | grep " =p "


### Overview of module/sysfs-parameters:

* TODO
* **split_area_limit** split_area_limit denotes the number of splits that the
  driver is allowed to apply to individual clips. The idea is: when you submit
  two damage regions for drawing, and both regions overlap, and the first one
  already started, then it sometimes makes sense to split the second area into
  four smaller regions, from which three can already start drawing. This is
  really useful for writing applications where there is usually a little bit of
  overlap between subsequent drawing areas

In addition, two custom ioctls are currently implemented for the ebc driver:

* TODO

### Black and White mode

Activate with

	echo 1 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/bw_mode

the threshold value can be set using:

	echo 7 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/bw_threshold

7 is the default value, meaning that all pixel values lower than 7 will be cast
to 0 (black) and all values larger than, or equal to, 7 will be cast to 15
(white).

### Auto Refresh

Enabling automatic global (full screen) refreshes:

	echo 1 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/auto_refresh

Global refreshes are triggered based on the area drawing using partial
refreshes, in units of total screen area.

	echo 2 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/refresh_threshold

therefore will trigger a globlal refresh whenever 2 screen areas where drawn.

The threshold should be set according to the application used. For example,
evince and xournalpp really like to redraw the screen very often, so a value of
20 suffices.
Other require lower numbers.

The waveform to use for global refreshes can be set via

	echo 4 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/refresh_waveform

A value of 4 is the default.

### Waveforms

* the **default_waveform** parameter controls which waveform is used. Based on
  information from include/drm/drm_epd_helper.h, the integer values are
  associated with the following waveforms:

		0: @DRM_EPD_WF_RESET: Used to initialize the panel, ends with white
		1: @DRM_EPD_WF_A2: Fast transitions between black and white only
		2: @DRM_EPD_WF_DU: Transitions 16-level grayscale to monochrome
		3: @DRM_EPD_WF_DU4: Transitions 16-level grayscale to 4-level grayscale
		4: @DRM_EPD_WF_GC16: High-quality but flashy 16-level grayscale
		5: @DRM_EPD_WF_GCC16: Less flashy 16-level grayscale
		6: @DRM_EPD_WF_GL16: Less flashy 16-level grayscale
		7: @DRM_EPD_WF_GLR16: Less flashy 16-level grayscale, plus anti-ghosting
		8: @DRM_EPD_WF_GLD16: Less flashy 16-level grayscale, plus anti-ghosting

* (side note): Based on information from drivers/gpu/drm/drm_epd_helper.c, the
  Pinenote uses eps lut form 0x19, which associated waveform types with the
  luts stored in the file as:

		.versions = {
		    0x19,
		    0x43,
		},
		.format = DRM_EPD_LUT_5BIT_PACKED,
		.modes = {
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_RESET]  = 0,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_DU]     = 1,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_DU4]    = 7,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GC16]   = 2,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GL16]   = 3,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GLR16]  = 4,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GLD16]  = 5,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_A2]     = 6,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GCC16]  = 4,
		},

  For example, if you want to inspect/modify the A2 waveform, this corresponds
  to the 7th waveform in the lut file (index 6), but is activated via
  **default_waveoform** by writing value 1.

### Trimming the A2 waveform

You can trim the A2 waveform for improved writing performance, with the
downside that black sometimes is displayed in gray tones.

The supplied script is very slow and unoptimized and therefore not run
automatically (run time on pinenote ca. 20 minutes).

Call these command in a root shell to trim the A2 waveform (note: this will
reboot the pinenote once):

	cd /root
	# this command should take ca. 20 minutes !!!
    time python3 parse_waveforms_and_modify.py
	# save the original waveforms for later use
    mv /lib/firmware/rockchip/ebc.wbf /lib/firmware/rockchip/ebc_orig.wbf
   	ln -s /lib/firmware/rockchip/ebc_modified.wbf /lib/firmware/rockchip/ebc.wbf
	update-initramfs -u -k all
	reboot

### Xournalpp/Writing

* Switch to "BW+Dither" mode when working in Xpp
* Kinetic scrolling needs to be disabled because GTK3's implementation
  interferes with some aspect of touch input handling, including touch cancel
  events

# Firmware Blobs

To the best of our knowledge, the following non-open code is run as firmware on
your PineNote:

* rk43566 RAM timings/TF-A
* Bluetooth/Wifi firmware
* Touchscreen firmware
* Firmware on the second BLE chip, used to connect the Pen buttons of batch 1

Ask the PineNote chat for more information.

# Topics to cover here

* DBUS service

	* contrl ebc driver
	* [to implement] handle pen pairing/unpairing

* The GNOME extension
* BLE Pen (Batch 1 from 2022 only)
* Resources

Commit message:

userguide: Spelling improvements
Make several small improvements, like:
- Proper and consistent casing, like 'PineNote', 'GNOME', 'Wi-Fi', etc.
- PineNote package repository is configured, no longer 'should be'
- Fix minor typos

userguide_raw/docs/index.md, after:

# Userguide for the Debian Trixie PineNote OS image

## Introduction

Hi there, nice of you to install this Debian image on your PineNote!

Before you begin, please bear in mind that the PineNote, and this image, is
aimed at experienced users and developers and many things need manual tweaking
or do not just work yet.
However, many things also work, and you can take control of quite a lot of
things.
If you have not done this yet, we strongly recommend to at least skim this
document before proceeding to use your PineNote.

If you want to improve this text, merge requests are very very much appreciated!

[Improve on github](https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-tweaks/tree/main/pn_handbook)

## Where to get help

Remember, software for the PineNote is created by the community, for the
community!

Probably the best and fastest way to get help is to join the PineNote chat via
Matrix, IRC or Discord. Please refer to the wiki page for more information on
chats and forums: [Pine64
Wiki](https://wiki.pine64.org/wiki/Main_Page#Community_and_Support).

## Getting started

* User/Password: You are logged in as user "user" with password "1234". sudo is
  activated. We suggest to set a root password:

    ```
    sudo su - root
    passwd
    ```

* The **Documents/** directory contains one sample .pdf and one .epub file. Try
  opening them and start reading!

* You may want (should!) to reconfigure your locales:

	```
	sudo dpkg-reconfigure locales
 	```

  GNOME localisation can be changed in the settings.

* The status bar at the top contains the refresh button and the PineNote-Helper
  GNOME extension, which helps you to control some aspects of the eink display.
  Both of these items will become important for an effective use of the
  PineNote in a GNOME environment.

* (advanced users) Your PineNote comes partitioned with two Operating System
  partitions (**os1** and **os2**, each ca. 15 GB in size).
  The default install resides on **os1**, leaving **os2** for experiments, such
  as other distributions images, etc. If you plan on modifying this
  installation heavily, a second install to **os2** could help in recovering
  from serious errors. More information on installing a Debian image to **os2**
  can be found
  [here](https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-debian-image/blob/trixie/partition_tables/Readme.md).

## How do I...

* **Read a book (epub)/pdf**:
	* Koreader is already installed and should be registered for corresponding
	  file types
* **Take notes**: Xournalpp is installed on the PineNote by default.
  See this meta-issue on github for more information and other programs to
  test: https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-debian-image/issues/81
* Surf the internet using Firefox
* **Use the PineNote as an external screen?**:
	* (untested) The Weylus project could be of help: https://github.com/H-M-H/Weylus
* **Use an external monitor with the PineNote?**: The PineNote is not wired to
  provide external display support via usb-c (this is called [alternate
  mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB-C#Alternate_modes). Therefore, if you
  want to use the PineNote as an external display, you will need to use other
  means.
	* (untested) The Weylus project could be of help: https://github.com/H-M-H/Weylus
	* (untested) Provided that you are running a newer GNOME installation on
	  your computer, you could try to use GNOME remote connections and virtual
	  monitors
	  (https://ubuntuhandbook.org/index.php/2023/07/share-extended-screen-gnome/)

## The GNOME extension for the PineNote

The PN comes with an extension installed that provides quick access to certain
PineNote-related functionality.
Four items are added to the GNOME interface:

* a "global refresh" button right next the system clock (circular arrow)
* a P/Q performance/quality mode switcher and indicator (to the right of the
  refresh button)
* A menu button/indicator, to the right of the mode switcher.
* An additional backlight slider is also added to the quicksettings menu,
  opened by clicking/touching the battery symbol in the upper right of the
  panel

![gnome_extension](img/gnome_extension.png)

## Updates

Apart from a number of tweaks aimed at producing an improved user experience on
the PineNote, and a few patched packages, you are running a Debian Trixie
Operating System which can be maintained as every other system. Use `apt` or
`aptitude` to manage you packages. `gnome-software` is also installed and
should prompt you within GNOME in regular intervals if software updates are
available.

A PineNote package repository is configured by default in this installation.
For manual configuration of the repository, please refer to [this part of the image
Readme](https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-debian-image/tree/dev#pinenote-specific-debian-repository).

## Drawing Performance is too slow

Multiple things come into play here, and debugging those issues usually is
complicated:

* Please note the EPD (eink) panel is highly temperature sensitive. Colder
  temperatures require longer waveforms to excitate the ink particles in the
  panel, which there leads to slower refresh rates.
* Xournalpp: There is an older, slightly patched, Xournalpp available. For
  *some* people, drawing performance increased with that version, for others
  not. Note that sometimes the background is not properly refreshed in this
  version, requiring a small scrolling action to actually show the background.
* Make sure to cycle to Quality mode and then back to Performance mode in
  GNOME. This is done using the P/Q Symbols in the upper status bar. Just press
  the respective character once to change between modes. You want the
  P(erformance) mode for drawing.
* It was reported that the 6.3 kernel version installed on the PineNote
  provides faster drawing performance (the downside is that potentially in some
  scenarios you will observe visual artifacts due to some subtle internal
  queuing bugs)

See also [this github
issue](https://github.com/PNDeb/pinenote-debian-image/issues/81) for more
information.

## Using another partition for /home

Depending on the method of installation, /home is located on the root
partition, which is quite small in size (check by analysing the output of the
*mount* command).
However, a bash script is
provided in `/root/switch_home_to_other_partition.sh` which can be used to
change the partition that is used for /home. The script can also transfer data
from the current /home to the new partition. Call as root.

Example to switch /home to /dev/mmcblk0p7:

	cd /root
	switch_home_to_other_partition.sh /dev/mmcblk0p7

## Switching the default boot partitions

You need shell root access, either via ssh, or via the UART dongle

* mount the uboot_env partition:

			mount /uboot_env

* use the provided shell script to change the boot order:

			cd /root
			./uboot_change_bootmenu.sh

## Documentation for apps/systems

### Wakeup-Sources

The PineNote can be woken up from suspend from these sources:

* Cover opening
* Bluetooth
* Power cable plug-in/plug-out
* PWR Button
* Touch screen (not configured by default)
* (batch 1 from 2022): BLE Buttons on the pen

### Sleep sources

* PWR-Button-press
* Pen-Button-Press

### BLE Pen (Buttons)

!!! info

	This is only relevant for the first batch of PineNotes, sold in 2022. The
	2024 batch does not have BLE buttons in the pen!

The PineNote Pen interfaces with the PineNote using two interfaces:

* The stylus input is one using the touchscreen (cyttsp5 driver),
* on the other hand, the three buttons are controlled via a separate
  Bluetooth-Low-Energy-based connection.

  A driver for the BLE-button interface was developed by smaeul
	(https://github.com/smaeul/linux/commits/rk356x-ebc-dev).

The hardware contains non-volatile storage for the MAC address - it could be
that the pen just works. Otherwise, as root, connect manually:

	echo 1 > /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/scan; # scanning takes ca. 12 seconds
											 # press the buttons during scanning
    # print MAC address pen
	cat /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/scan
	echo [MAC] > /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/pen_address

Afterwards, check that the pen is working by checking the pen attributes:

	cat /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/pen_version
	cat /sys/bus/spi/devices/spi4.0/pen_battery

### EBC Kernel Driver

The EBC subsystem controls the eink (or EPD) display and is one of components
which require most tweaking for each user.

	* ioctls

		* trigger global refresh
		* set offline-screen
		* [to implement] set standby screen mask & behavior
	* misc:

		* discuss the waveform-switching issues in a general DE environment:
		  recommend to always do a global refresh after switching waveforms,
		  unless you know that your buffer is compatible
### Usage

All module parameters are controlled using the sysfs parameters in
/sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters

The module parameters can also be set on module load time, for example using
the modprobe configuration file:

	root@pinenote:~# cat /etc/modprobe.d/rockchip_ebc.conf
	options rockchip_ebc direct_mode=0 auto_refresh=1 split_area_limit=0 panel_reflection=1

By default the parameters in /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters need to be
writen to as root, but this can be easily changed via udev rules.

### Debugging

Newer versions of the kernel driver use the (dynamic debug
feature)[https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/dynamic-debug-howto.html]
of the linux kernel.

As root, the following commands should get you going. Note that the line
numbers can change between kernel releases! Check the output of `cat control |
grep rockchip_ebc`

	cd /sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/
	# lists all debug outputs available for the module
	cat control  | grep rockchip_ebc
	# now we can activate/disable individual debug statements
	echo -n 'file drivers/gpu/drm/rockchip/rockchip_ebc.c line 1289 +p' > control
	# list currently active (=p) debug statements
	cat control  | grep rockchip_ebc | grep " =p "


### Overview of module/sysfs-parameters:

* TODO
* **split_area_limit** split_area_limit denotes the number of splits that the
  driver is allowed to apply to individual clips. The idea is: when you submit
  two damage regions for drawing, and both regions overlap, and the first one
  already started, then it sometimes makes sense to split the second area into
  four smaller regions, from which three can already start drawing. This is
  really useful for writing applications where there is usually a little bit of
  overlap between subsequent drawing areas

In addition, two custom ioctls are currently implemented for the ebc driver:

* TODO

### Black and White mode

Activate with

	echo 1 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/bw_mode

the threshold value can be set using:

	echo 7 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/bw_threshold

7 is the default value, meaning that all pixel values lower than 7 will be cast
to 0 (black) and all values larger than, or equal to, 7 will be cast to 15
(white).

### Auto Refresh

Enabling automatic global (full screen) refreshes:

	echo 1 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/auto_refresh

Global refreshes are triggered based on the area drawing using partial
refreshes, in units of total screen area.

	echo 2 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/refresh_threshold

therefore will trigger a globlal refresh whenever 2 screen areas where drawn.

The threshold should be set according to the application used. For example,
evince and xournalpp really like to redraw the screen very often, so a value of
20 suffices.
Other require lower numbers.

The waveform to use for global refreshes can be set via

	echo 4 > /sys/module/rockchip_ebc/parameters/refresh_waveform

A value of 4 is the default.

### Waveforms

* the **default_waveform** parameter controls which waveform is used. Based on
  information from include/drm/drm_epd_helper.h, the integer values are
  associated with the following waveforms:

		0: @DRM_EPD_WF_RESET: Used to initialize the panel, ends with white
		1: @DRM_EPD_WF_A2: Fast transitions between black and white only
		2: @DRM_EPD_WF_DU: Transitions 16-level grayscale to monochrome
		3: @DRM_EPD_WF_DU4: Transitions 16-level grayscale to 4-level grayscale
		4: @DRM_EPD_WF_GC16: High-quality but flashy 16-level grayscale
		5: @DRM_EPD_WF_GCC16: Less flashy 16-level grayscale
		6: @DRM_EPD_WF_GL16: Less flashy 16-level grayscale
		7: @DRM_EPD_WF_GLR16: Less flashy 16-level grayscale, plus anti-ghosting
		8: @DRM_EPD_WF_GLD16: Less flashy 16-level grayscale, plus anti-ghosting

* (side note): Based on information from drivers/gpu/drm/drm_epd_helper.c, the
  PineNote uses eps lut form 0x19, which associates waveform types with the
  luts stored in the file as:

		.versions = {
		    0x19,
		    0x43,
		},
		.format = DRM_EPD_LUT_5BIT_PACKED,
		.modes = {
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_RESET]  = 0,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_DU]     = 1,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_DU4]    = 7,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GC16]   = 2,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GL16]   = 3,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GLR16]  = 4,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GLD16]  = 5,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_A2]     = 6,
		    [DRM_EPD_WF_GCC16]  = 4,
		},

  For example, if you want to inspect/modify the A2 waveform, this corresponds
  to the 7th waveform in the lut file (index 6), but is activated via
  **default_waveform** by writing value 1.

### Trimming the A2 waveform

You can trim the A2 waveform for improved writing performance, with the
downside that black sometimes is displayed in gray tones.

The supplied script is very slow and unoptimized and therefore not run
automatically (run time on PineNote ca. 20 minutes).

Call these command in a root shell to trim the A2 waveform (note: this will
reboot the PineNote once):

	cd /root
	# this command should take ca. 20 minutes !!!
    time python3 parse_waveforms_and_modify.py
	# save the original waveforms for later use
    mv /lib/firmware/rockchip/ebc.wbf /lib/firmware/rockchip/ebc_orig.wbf
   	ln -s /lib/firmware/rockchip/ebc_modified.wbf /lib/firmware/rockchip/ebc.wbf
	update-initramfs -u -k all
	reboot

### Xournalpp/Writing

* Switch to "BW+Dither" mode when working in Xournalpp
* Kinetic scrolling needs to be disabled because GTK3's implementation
  interferes with some aspect of touch input handling, including touch cancel
  events

# Firmware Blobs

To the best of our knowledge, the following non-open code is run as firmware on
your PineNote:

* rk43566 RAM timings/TF-A
* Bluetooth/Wi-Fi firmware
* Touchscreen firmware
* Firmware on the second BLE chip, used to connect the Pen buttons of batch 1

Ask the PineNote chat for more information.

# Topics to cover here

* DBUS service

	* control ebc driver
	* [to implement] handle pen pairing/unpairing

* The GNOME extension
* BLE Pen (Batch 1 from 2022 only)
* Resources
